README.md, before:

# bwaMem

This workflow aligns sequence data provided as fastq files against a genomic reference using bwa (burrows-wheeler-aligner).  Prior to alignment, there are options to remove 5' umi sequence and to trim off 3' sequencing adapter. Readgroup information to be injected into the bam header needs to be provided.  The workflow can also split the input data into a requested number of chunks, align each separately then merge the separate alignments into a single bam file.  This decreases the workflow run time.  Optional bwa mem parameters can be provided to the workflow.

## Overview

## Dependencies

* [bwa 0.7.17](https://github.com/lh3/bwa/archive/0.7.17.tar.gz)
* [samtools 1.9](https://github.com/samtools/samtools/archive/0.1.19.tar.gz)
* [cutadapt 1.8.3](https://cutadapt.readthedocs.io/en/v1.8.3/)
* [slicer 0.3.0](https://github.com/OpenGene/slicer/archive/v0.3.0.tar.gz)
* [python 3.7](https://www.python.org)
* [barcodex-rs 0.1.2](https://github.com/oicr-gsi/barcodex-rs/archive/v0.1.2.tar.gz)
* [rust 1.2](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install)
* [gsi software modules : samtools 1.9 bwa 0.7.17](https://gitlab.oicr.on.ca/ResearchIT/modulator)
* [gsi hg38 modules : hg38-bwa-index-with-alt 0.7.17](https://gitlab.oicr.on.ca/ResearchIT/modulator)
* [gsi hg19 modules : hg19-bwa-index 0.7.17](https://gitlab.oicr.on.ca/ResearchIT/modulator)
* [gsi mm10 modules :mm10-bwa-index 0.7.17](https://gitlab.oicr.on.ca/ResearchIT/modulator)


## Usage

### Cromwell
```
java -jar cromwell.jar run bwaMem.wdl --inputs inputs.json
```

### Inputs

#### Required workflow parameters:
Parameter|Value|Description
---|---|---
`fastqR1`|File|Fastq file for read 1
`outputFileNamePrefix`|String|Prefix for output files
`reference`|String|The genome reference build. For example: hg19, hg38, mm10
`runBwaMem.readGroups`|String|The readgroup information to be injected into the bam header


#### Optional workflow parameters:
Parameter|Value|Default|Description
---|---|---|---
`fastqR2`|File?|None|Fastq file for read 2
`numChunk`|Int|1|Number of chunks to split fastq file [1, no splitting]
`doUMIextract`|Boolean|false|If true, UMI will be extracted before alignment [false]
`doTrim`|Boolean|false|If true, adapters will be trimmed before alignment [false]
`numReads`|Int?|None|Number of reads


#### Optional task parameters:
Parameter|Value|Default|Description
---|---|---|---
`countChunkSize.modules`|String|"python/3.7"|Required environment modules
`countChunkSize.jobMemory`|Int|16|Memory allocated for this job
`countChunkSize.timeout`|Int|48|Hours before task timeout
`slicerR1.modules`|String|"slicer/0.3.0"|Required environment modules
`slicerR1.jobMemory`|Int|16|Memory allocated for this job
`slicerR1.timeout`|Int|48|Hours before task timeout
`slicerR2.modules`|String|"slicer/0.3.0"|Required environment modules
`slicerR2.jobMemory`|Int|16|Memory allocated for this job
`slicerR2.timeout`|Int|48|Hours before task timeout
`extractUMIs.umiList`|String|"umiList"|Reference file with valid UMIs
`extractUMIs.outputPrefix`|String|"extractUMIs_output"|Specifies the start of the output files
`extractUMIs.pattern1`|String|"(?P<umi_1>^[ACGT]{3}[ACG])(?P<discard_1>T)|(?P<umi_2>^[ACGT]{3})(?P<discard_2>T)"|UMI RegEx pattern 1
`extractUMIs.pattern2`|String|"(?P<umi_1>^[ACGT]{3}[ACG])(?P<discard_1>T)|(?P<umi_2>^[ACGT]{3})(?P<discard_2>T)"|UMI RegEx pattern 2
`extractUMIs.modules`|String|"barcodex-rs/0.1.2 rust/1.45.1"|Required environment modules
`extractUMIs.jobMemory`|Int|24|Memory allocated for this job
`extractUMIs.timeout`|Int|12|Time in hours before task timeout
`adapterTrimming.modules`|String|"cutadapt/1.8.3"|Required environment modules
`adapterTrimming.doUMItrim`|Boolean|false|If true, do umi trimming
`adapterTrimming.umiLength`|Int|5|The number of bases to trim when doUMItrim is true. If the given length is positive, the bases are removed from the beginning of each read. If it is negative, the bases are removed from the end
`adapterTrimming.trimMinLength`|Int|1|Minimum length of reads to keep
`adapterTrimming.trimMinQuality`|Int|0|Minimum quality of read ends to keep
`adapterTrimming.adapter1`|String|"AGATCGGAAGAGCACACGTCTGAACTCCAGTCAC"|Adapter sequence to trim from read 1
`adapterTrimming.adapter2`|String|"AGATCGGAAGAGCGTCGTGTAGGGAAAGAGTGT"|Adapter sequence to trim from read 2
`adapterTrimming.addParam`|String?|None|Additional cutadapt parameters
`adapterTrimming.jobMemory`|Int|16|Memory allocated for this job
`adapterTrimming.timeout`|Int|48|Hours before task timeout
`runBwaMem.addParam`|String?|None|Additional BWA parameters
`runBwaMem.threads`|Int|8|Requested CPU threads
`runBwaMem.jobMemory`|Int|32|Memory allocated for this job
`runBwaMem.timeout`|Int|96|Hours before task timeout
`bamMerge.jobMemory`|Int|32|Memory allocated indexing job
`bamMerge.modules`|String|"samtools/1.9"|Required environment modules
`bamMerge.timeout`|Int|72|Hours before task timeout
`indexBam.jobMemory`|Int|12|Memory allocated indexing job
`indexBam.modules`|String|"samtools/1.9"|Modules for running indexing job
`indexBam.timeout`|Int|48|Hours before task timeout
`adapterTrimmingLog.jobMemory`|Int|12|Memory allocated indexing job
`adapterTrimmingLog.timeout`|Int|48|Hours before task timeout


### Outputs

Output | Type | Description
---|---|---
`bwaMemBam`|File|output merged bam aligned to genome
`bwaMemIndex`|File|output index file for bam aligned to genome
`log`|File?|a summary log file for adapter trimming
`cutAdaptAllLogs`|File?|a file containing all logs for adapter trimming for each fastq chunk


## Commands
 This section lists command(s) run by bwaMem workflow
 
 Split the fastq files into chunks to parallelize the alignment (optional).  If requested, subsequent steps will be run on each fastq chunk
 
 ```
         if [ -z "~{numReads}" ]; then
             totalLines=$(zcat ~{fastqR1} | wc -l)
         else totalLines=$((~{numReads}*4))
         fi
 
         python3 -c "from math import ceil; print (int(ceil(($totalLines/4.0)/~{numChunk})*4))"
 	slicer -i ~{fastqR} -l ~{chunkSize} --gzip
 ```
 
 
 Trim off the UMI bases (optional)
 
 ```
             barcodex-rs --umilist ~{umiList} --prefix ~{outputPrefix} --separator "__" inline \
             --pattern1 '~{pattern1}' --r1-in ~{fastq1} \
             ~{if (defined(fastq2)) then "--pattern2 '~{pattern2}' --r2-in ~{fastq2} " else ""}
 
             cat ~{outputPrefix}_UMI_counts.json > umiCounts.txt
 
             tr [,] ',\n' < umiCounts.txt | sed 's/[{}]//' > tmp.txt
             echo "{$(sort -i tmp.txt)}" > new.txt
             tr '\n' ',' < new.txt | sed 's/,$//' > ~{outputPrefix}_UMI_counts.json
 ```
 
 Trim off adapter sequence (optional)
 
 ```
         cutadapt -q ~{trimMinQuality} \
                 -m ~{trimMinLength} \
                 -a ~{adapter1} \
                 -o ~{resultFastqR1} \
                 ~{if (defined(fastqR2)) then "-A ~{adapter2} -p ~{resultFastqR2} " else ""} \
                 ~{if (doUMItrim) then "-u ~{umiLength} -U ~{umiLength} " else ""} \
                 ~{addParam} \
                 ~{fastqR1} \
                 ~{fastqR2} > ~{resultLog}
 ```
 
 Align to reference with bwa mem
 
 ```
         mkdir -p ~{tmpDir}
         bwa mem -M \
             -t ~{threads} ~{addParam}  \
             -R  ~{readGroups} \
             ~{bwaRef} \
             ~{read1s} \
             ~{read2s} \
         | \
         samtools sort -O bam -T ~{tmpDir} -o ~{resultBam} - 
 ```
 
 
 Merge parallelized alignments (optional, if the fastq had been split)
 
 ```
         samtools merge \
         -c \
         ~{resultMergedBam} \
         ~{sep=" " bams} 
 ```
 
 
 Index the bam file
 
 ```
         samtools index ~{inputBam} ~{resultBai}
 ```
 
 Merging of parallelized Adapter trimming logs
 
 ```
        COMMANDS NOT SHOWN, see WDL for details
 ```
 ## Support

For support, please file an issue on the [Github project](https://github.com/oicr-gsi) or send an email to gsi@oicr.on.ca .

_Generated with generate-markdown-readme (https://github.com/oicr-gsi/gsi-wdl-tools/)_

Commit message:

Added a read group validation task, and made readGroups a workflow-level input

README.md, after:

# bwaMem

This workflow aligns sequence data provided as fastq files against a genomic reference using bwa (burrows-wheeler-aligner).  Prior to alignment, there are options to remove 5' umi sequence and to trim off 3' sequencing adapter. Readgroup information to be injected into the bam header needs to be provided.  The workflow can also split the input data into a requested number of chunks, align each separately then merge the separate alignments into a single bam file.  This decreases the workflow run time.  Optional bwa mem parameters can be provided to the workflow.

## Overview

## Dependencies

* [bwa 0.7.17](https://github.com/lh3/bwa/archive/0.7.17.tar.gz)
* [samtools 1.9](https://github.com/samtools/samtools/archive/0.1.19.tar.gz)
* [cutadapt 1.8.3](https://cutadapt.readthedocs.io/en/v1.8.3/)
* [slicer 0.3.0](https://github.com/OpenGene/slicer/archive/v0.3.0.tar.gz)
* [python 3.7](https://www.python.org)
* [barcodex-rs 0.1.2](https://github.com/oicr-gsi/barcodex-rs/archive/v0.1.2.tar.gz)
* [rust 1.2](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install)
* [gsi software modules : samtools 1.9 bwa 0.7.17](https://gitlab.oicr.on.ca/ResearchIT/modulator)
* [gsi hg38 modules : hg38-bwa-index-with-alt 0.7.17](https://gitlab.oicr.on.ca/ResearchIT/modulator)
* [gsi hg19 modules : hg19-bwa-index 0.7.17](https://gitlab.oicr.on.ca/ResearchIT/modulator)
* [gsi mm10 modules :mm10-bwa-index 0.7.17](https://gitlab.oicr.on.ca/ResearchIT/modulator)


## Usage

### Cromwell
```
java -jar cromwell.jar run bwaMem.wdl --inputs inputs.json
```

### Inputs

#### Required workflow parameters:
Parameter|Value|Description
---|---|---
`fastqR1`|File|Fastq file for read 1
`outputFileNamePrefix`|String|Prefix for output files
`readGroups`|String|The readgroup information to be injected into the bam header
`reference`|String|The genome reference build. For example: hg19, hg38, mm10


#### Optional workflow parameters:
Parameter|Value|Default|Description
---|---|---|---
`fastqR2`|File?|None|Fastq file for read 2
`numChunk`|Int|1|Number of chunks to split fastq file [1, no splitting]
`doUMIextract`|Boolean|false|If true, UMI will be extracted before alignment [false]
`doTrim`|Boolean|false|If true, adapters will be trimmed before alignment [false]
`numReads`|Int?|None|Number of reads


#### Optional task parameters:
Parameter|Value|Default|Description
---|---|---|---
`readGroupCheck.jobMemory`|Int|1|Memory allocated for this job
`readGroupCheck.timeout`|Int|1|Hours before task timeout
`countChunkSize.modules`|String|"python/3.7"|Required environment modules
`countChunkSize.jobMemory`|Int|16|Memory allocated for this job
`countChunkSize.timeout`|Int|48|Hours before task timeout
`slicerR1.modules`|String|"slicer/0.3.0"|Required environment modules
`slicerR1.jobMemory`|Int|16|Memory allocated for this job
`slicerR1.timeout`|Int|48|Hours before task timeout
`slicerR2.modules`|String|"slicer/0.3.0"|Required environment modules
`slicerR2.jobMemory`|Int|16|Memory allocated for this job
`slicerR2.timeout`|Int|48|Hours before task timeout
`extractUMIs.umiList`|String|"umiList"|Reference file with valid UMIs
`extractUMIs.outputPrefix`|String|"extractUMIs_output"|Specifies the start of the output files
`extractUMIs.pattern1`|String|"(?P<umi_1>^[ACGT]{3}[ACG])(?P<discard_1>T)|(?P<umi_2>^[ACGT]{3})(?P<discard_2>T)"|UMI RegEx pattern 1
`extractUMIs.pattern2`|String|"(?P<umi_1>^[ACGT]{3}[ACG])(?P<discard_1>T)|(?P<umi_2>^[ACGT]{3})(?P<discard_2>T)"|UMI RegEx pattern 2
`extractUMIs.modules`|String|"barcodex-rs/0.1.2 rust/1.45.1"|Required environment modules
`extractUMIs.jobMemory`|Int|24|Memory allocated for this job
`extractUMIs.timeout`|Int|12|Time in hours before task timeout
`adapterTrimming.modules`|String|"cutadapt/1.8.3"|Required environment modules
`adapterTrimming.doUMItrim`|Boolean|false|If true, do umi trimming
`adapterTrimming.umiLength`|Int|5|The number of bases to trim when doUMItrim is true. If the given length is positive, the bases are removed from the beginning of each read. If it is negative, the bases are removed from the end
`adapterTrimming.trimMinLength`|Int|1|Minimum length of reads to keep
`adapterTrimming.trimMinQuality`|Int|0|Minimum quality of read ends to keep
`adapterTrimming.adapter1`|String|"AGATCGGAAGAGCACACGTCTGAACTCCAGTCAC"|Adapter sequence to trim from read 1
`adapterTrimming.adapter2`|String|"AGATCGGAAGAGCGTCGTGTAGGGAAAGAGTGT"|Adapter sequence to trim from read 2
`adapterTrimming.addParam`|String?|None|Additional cutadapt parameters
`adapterTrimming.jobMemory`|Int|16|Memory allocated for this job
`adapterTrimming.timeout`|Int|48|Hours before task timeout
`runBwaMem.addParam`|String?|None|Additional BWA parameters
`runBwaMem.threads`|Int|8|Requested CPU threads
`runBwaMem.jobMemory`|Int|32|Memory allocated for this job
`runBwaMem.timeout`|Int|96|Hours before task timeout
`bamMerge.jobMemory`|Int|32|Memory allocated indexing job
`bamMerge.modules`|String|"samtools/1.9"|Required environment modules
`bamMerge.timeout`|Int|72|Hours before task timeout
`indexBam.jobMemory`|Int|12|Memory allocated indexing job
`indexBam.modules`|String|"samtools/1.9"|Modules for running indexing job
`indexBam.timeout`|Int|48|Hours before task timeout
`adapterTrimmingLog.jobMemory`|Int|12|Memory allocated indexing job
`adapterTrimmingLog.timeout`|Int|48|Hours before task timeout


### Outputs

Output | Type | Description
---|---|---
`bwaMemBam`|File|output merged bam aligned to genome
`bwaMemIndex`|File|output index file for bam aligned to genome
`log`|File?|a summary log file for adapter trimming
`cutAdaptAllLogs`|File?|a file containing all logs for adapter trimming for each fastq chunk


## Commands
 This section lists command(s) run by bwaMem workflow
 
 Validate the read group string prior to running the rest of the workflow
 
 ```
         set -euo pipefail 
 
         # Split the string into an array 
         IFS=$'\\t' read -ra readFields <<< ~{readGroups}
         idPresent=false
 
         for field in "${readFields[@]}"; do 
             if [[ $field == ID:* ]]; then idPresent=true; break; fi
         done 
 
         # Confirm if string begins with '@RG' and 'ID' field is present
         if ! [[ ~{readGroups} == @RG* ]] ; then 
             echo "The read group line is not started with @RG" >&2; exit 1
         fi
         if ! $idPresent ; then echo "Missing ID within the read group line" >&2; exit 1 ; fi
 ```
 
 
 Split the fastq files into chunks to parallelize the alignment (optional).  If requested, subsequent steps will be run on each fastq chunk
 
 ```
         if [ -z "~{numReads}" ]; then
             totalLines=$(zcat ~{fastqR1} | wc -l)
         else totalLines=$((~{numReads}*4))
         fi
 
         python3 -c "from math import ceil; print (int(ceil(($totalLines/4.0)/~{numChunk})*4))"
 	slicer -i ~{fastqR} -l ~{chunkSize} --gzip
 ```
 
 
 Trim off the UMI bases (optional)
 
 ```
             barcodex-rs --umilist ~{umiList} --prefix ~{outputPrefix} --separator "__" inline \
             --pattern1 '~{pattern1}' --r1-in ~{fastq1} \
             ~{if (defined(fastq2)) then "--pattern2 '~{pattern2}' --r2-in ~{fastq2} " else ""}
 
             cat ~{outputPrefix}_UMI_counts.json > umiCounts.txt
 
             tr [,] ',\n' < umiCounts.txt | sed 's/[{}]//' > tmp.txt
             echo "{$(sort -i tmp.txt)}" > new.txt
             tr '\n' ',' < new.txt | sed 's/,$//' > ~{outputPrefix}_UMI_counts.json
 ```
 
 Trim off adapter sequence (optional)
 
 ```
         cutadapt -q ~{trimMinQuality} \
                 -m ~{trimMinLength} \
                 -a ~{adapter1} \
                 -o ~{resultFastqR1} \
                 ~{if (defined(fastqR2)) then "-A ~{adapter2} -p ~{resultFastqR2} " else ""} \
                 ~{if (doUMItrim) then "-u ~{umiLength} -U ~{umiLength} " else ""} \
                 ~{addParam} \
                 ~{fastqR1} \
                 ~{fastqR2} > ~{resultLog}
 ```
 
 Align to reference with bwa mem
 
 ```
         mkdir -p ~{tmpDir}
         bwa mem -M \
             -t ~{threads} ~{addParam}  \
             -R  ~{readGroups} \
             ~{bwaRef} \
             ~{read1s} \
             ~{read2s} \
         | \
         samtools sort -O bam -T ~{tmpDir} -o ~{resultBam} - 
 ```
 
 
 Merge parallelized alignments (optional, if the fastq had been split)
 
 ```
         samtools merge \
         -c \
         ~{resultMergedBam} \
         ~{sep=" " bams} 
 ```
 
 
 Index the bam file
 
 ```
         samtools index ~{inputBam} ~{resultBai}
 ```
 
 Merging of parallelized Adapter trimming logs
 
 ```
        COMMANDS NOT SHOWN, see WDL for details
 ```
 ## Support

For support, please file an issue on the [Github project](https://github.com/oicr-gsi) or send an email to gsi@oicr.on.ca .

_Generated with generate-markdown-readme (https://github.com/oicr-gsi/gsi-wdl-tools/)_
